Refactor pipeline building (#315)
pygfx/pygfx: docs/shaders.rst

Writing PyGfx shaders
=====================

> This document explains how to write shaders for PyGfx. This may be useful

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document explains how to write shaders for PyGfx for the WgpuRenderer. 
This may be useful if you want to improve the existing shaders, add 
new shaders to PyGfx, or if you want to implement custom shaders in 
your own project.
```

if you want to improve the existing shaders, add new shaders to PyGfx, or
if you want to implement custom shaders in your own project.

The shader class
----------------

> A shader object derives from ``WorldObjectShader``. Its purposes is to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A shader object derives from ``WorldObjectShader``. Its purpose is to
```

provide (templated) shader-code (WGSL), set the corresponding template variables, define
what bindings (buffers and textures) are used, and provide some more details
of the pipeline and the rendering.

The shader is associated with a WorldObject-material combination using the ``register_wgpu_render_function()``
decorator. This decorator can be applied to your shader class, but it can also
be applied to a function that returns multiple shader objects. This can be useful
if you want multiple "passes", like a compute pass to prepare some data.

The shader must implement a few methods. A typical shader is shown below:

.. code-block:: python

    from pygfx.renderers.wgpu import (
        register_wgpu_render_function, WorldObjectShader, Binding, RenderMask
    )

>     @register_wgpu_render_function(SomeWorldObject, SomeMaterial)

Reviewer: I get the "some..." analogy here, but it may be more illustrative to use code that actually works and does something?

    class SomeShader(WorldObjectShader):

        type = "render"  # must be "render" or "compute"

        def get_resources(self, wobject, shared):
            bindings = {

>                 0: Binding("u_stdinfo", "buffer/uniform", shared.uniform_buffer),

Reviewer: Is `u_stdinfo` a mandatory binding?

Author: No, but it's common. I added the other 2 common uniforms to this doc (wobject's uniform buffer and material's uniform buffer).

                ...
            }
            self.define_bindings(0, bindings)
            return {
                "index_buffer": None,
                "vertex_buffers": {},
                "bindings": {
                    0: bindings,
                },
            }

        def get_pipeline_info(self, wobject, shared):
            return {
                "primitive_topology": wgpu.PrimitiveTopology.triangle_list,
                "cull_mode": wgpu.CullMode.none,
            }

        def get_render_info(self, wobject, shared):
            n_vertices = ...
            n_instances = 1
            render_mask = wobject.render_mask
            if not render_mask:

>                 render_mask = RenderMask.all

Reviewer: does the renderer default to all if you omit the key, or is it a required key to return?

            return {
                "indices": (n_vertices, n_instances),
                "render_mask": render_mask,
            }

        def get_code(self):
            return (
                self.code_definitions()
                + self.code_common()
                + self.code_vertex()
                + self.code_fragment()

>             )

Reviewer: is this a required format?

               ...
            }
            """

Remarks:

* In ``get_resources()``, the ``Binding`` object is used to collect all the required information on a binding.
* The wgsl code to define a group of bindings can be easily generated using ``define_bindings()``.
* You can also manually define the wgsl code for a binding in cases where this is easier.
  We recommend using a separate bindgroup for that.
* By convention, methods that return wgsl code are prefixed with "code".
* The ``render_mask`` specifies in what passes the object must be drawn. Users
  can set it on the object, but by default it is "auto" (zero), in which case it must
  be set by the shader. In the code above it is set to "all" which is a safe option, but if
  the shader knows that all fragments are opaque or all fragments are transparent,
  the ``render_mask`` can be set accordingly.

WGSL code and templating
------------------------

The shader code is written in `WGSL <https://www.w3.org/TR/WGSL/>`_. We use `jinja2-templating <https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/>`_
to allow flexible code generation. Here's an example:

.. code-block:: python

        def get_resources(self, wobject, shared):

>             self["scale"] = 1.2

Reviewer: is there an important reason this uses brackets instead of dots to access the attribute?

Author: This is the way to set templating variables. Added a comment for clarification.

                varyings.world_pos = vec3<f32>(world_pos.xyz / world_pos.w);
                return varyings;
            }
            """

        def code_fragment(self):
            return """
            @stage(fragment)
            fn fs_main(varyings: Varyings) -> FragmentOutput {
                ...
                let world_pos = varyings.world_pos;
                ...
            }
            """

FragmentOutput
--------------

In a somewhat similar way, the output of the fragment shader is
predefined. Though in this case the output is determined by the blend
mode and render pass (opaque or transparent), and the details are hidden
from the shader author. This way, PyGfx can support advanced handling
of transparency without affecting individual shaders.
All fragment functions in PyGfx are somewhat like this:

.. code-block:: python

        def code_fragment(self):
            return """
            @stage(fragment)
            fn fs_main(varyings: Varyings) -> FragmentOutput {
                ...
                var out = get_fragment_output(varyings.position.z, color);
                return out;
            }
            """

Picking
-------

> The output struct in the previous section also has a ``pick`` field that can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `output` struct of the fragment shader also has a ``pick`` field that can
```

be set with picking info. It is an ``u64`` into which we can pack as many fields
as needed, using the ``pick_pack()`` function. The material needs to
implement a corresponding ``_wgpu_get_pick_info()`` method
to unpack the picking info. See e.g. the picking of a mesh:

.. code-block:: python

        def code_fragment(self):
            return """
            @stage(fragment)
            fn fs_main(varyings: Varyings) -> FragmentOutput {
                ...
                var out = get_fragment_output(varyings.position.z, color);

>                 // The write_pick templating variable is builtin too

Reviewer: when is it true?

                out.pick = (
                    pick_pack(varyings.pick_id, 20) +
                    pick_pack(varyings.pick_idx, 26) +
                    pick_pack(u32(varyings.pick_coords.x * 64.0), 6) +
                    pick_pack(u32(varyings.pick_coords.y * 64.0), 6) +
                    pick_pack(u32(varyings.pick_coords.z * 64.0), 6)
                );
                $$ endif

                return out;
            }
            """

Clipping planes
---------------

For common features that apply to all/most objects, wgsl convenience functions
are available. Take clipping planes. One can call ``apply_clipping_planes()`` to
discard the fragment if it's outside of the clipping planes. Or use
``check_clipping_planes()`` to get a boolean.

.. code-block:: python

        def code_fragment(self):
            return """
            @stage(fragment)
            fn fs_main(varyings: Varyings) -> FragmentOutput {
                ...

                apply_clipping_planes(varyings.world_pos);
                var out = get_fragment_output(varyings.position.z, color);
                ...
                return out;
            }
            """

Colormapping
------------

> Many materials in PyGfx support colormapping. We distinguis between colormaps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many materials in PyGfx support colormapping. We distinguish between colormaps
```

with image input data, and vertex input data (texture coordinates). The number of

> channels of the input data must match the dimension of the colormap (1D, 2D or 3D).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
channels of the input data must match the dimensionality of the colormap (1D, 2D or 3D).
```

The base shader class has two corresponding helper functions, and there
is a wgsl helper function.

For images / volumes:

.. code-block:: python

        def get_resources(self, wobjwect, shared):
            ...

>             extra_bindings = self.define_img_colormap(material.map)

Reviewer: how should these be returned?

Author: I updated the example in the docs to follow what most of our shaders do: collect bindings in a list and then convert the list to a dict.

            ...

        def code_fragment(self):
            return """
            @stage(fragment)
            fn fs_main(varyings: Varyings) -> FragmentOutput {
                ...

>                 let color = sample_colormap(img_valu);

Reviewer: where does `img_valu` come from? also, should it be `img_value`?

Author: From sampling the image texture. Added an extra line above to clarify this.
